# Writing Collection

## Letters

### Chuck's Last Words for Jimmy

> *Better Call Saul* S04E03

```txt
Dear Jimmy,

    I have left many things unsaid in our relationship through the years. Rather
than all allow these unspoken thoughts to die with me, I've chosen to record
them here for you. I hope you will take my words in the spirit in which they are
intended.

    I remember quite clearly the day you came home from the hospital. You can't
imagine the joy on Mom's face. I can honestly say I never saw her happier than
she was on that day. You broght a shine to her life that nothing else ever did,
and I'm glad of that.

    We have not always seen eye to eye. I expect that will continue to be so in
the future. However, nothing will ever change the fact that we are brothers,
flesh and blood. And though we are very different people, I want you to know how
much I respect what you have made of yourself in these last few years. You have
taken the opportunity I gave you in the mailroom, and you have run with it,
becoming a valued member of the HHM family. For all the problems in your past,
I'm proud we share the name McGill.

    I sincerely admire your energy and resilience. I used to worry about you
finding a place in the world, but I'm not worried about that anymore. I'm
certain now that, no matter what the future may bring, you'll land on your feet,
and I hope when you read this, you remember me not only as your brother, but as
a person you knew was always in your corner.

                                                                        Chuck
```

### Kimberly Wexler's letter to the Planning Board in Broomfield

> *Better Call Saul* S05E09

```txt
Dear Mr. Armand Bekaris (Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission),
CC Elaine Perlman (Vice chair),

    Mesa Verde Bank and Trust respectfully submit the following request for your
consideration. In regards to the resolution number PZ2004-36 variance appeal to
allow for a six-and-one-half-foot encroachment into the minimum required rear
setback for a drive-through awning to facilitate access to the property at 841
North.

...
```
